uh let's join Thomas mcmanis director of
international State Crime initiative at
Queen Mary University joins us from
London thank you for being so patient I
know it's been a very long process this
morning and and we've been dipping in
and out of your uh comments as we've
gone I wouldn't mind getting an overview
of how you think the South Africans have
presented their case in terms of How
It's been very finely divided and
presented peace meal not just for the
court I think but also for the
international audience
yeah I think that's right that the the
the lawyers are thinking about the court
um and and they speak to the court but
they're also thinking about who's
watching and and and their presentation
was frankly very impressive they they
set out in a very concise way um some
devastating uh accusations and and put
strung together in such a uh a legally
sound way uh an understandable way and
also trying to make you know some
predictions about what might come back
tomorrow as a rebuttal um and the way
they set it out with the conduct and
then the intent those are the two
elements of a criminal case and then
going on to talk about jurisdiction the
link between the rights under protection
and the um the the measures required but
also then going into the urgency and and
that was one of the most devastating I
think for Israel's point of you part of
the presentation laying out why this is
urgent why this needs to happen now
these measures indeed um lawyer after
lawyer had a particular part of the
argument of the petition to present um
and I was just wondering of those I mean
initially adilla Hashim set the scene
did she not when she just really told
the court why they were here and what
the main issues were behind the petition
and and why it needed to be presented in
this way by so many lawyers within their
band yeah and and every lawyer had a
very distinct um issue that they were
dealing with so we saw first the conduct
um where we have um and and
interestingly looking at the conduct we
only saw quotes from un uh off agencies
and un officers you have to remember the
international court of justice is a un
body not like the IC which is
independent of the United Nations so
they're using only the evidence of
the're basically you know reflecting
back onto the court evidence of their
own agencies their own officers um and
then moving on to intent which in uh
with genocide is usually the most
difficult uh part to prove um but it has
been made easy by the Declarations by
members of the Israeli State um and not
just you know talking about the
intentions that we've seen from
pronunciations and the rhetoric from the
Israeli government but trying to link
that to the behavior of soldiers on the
ground this again is to preempt any
rebuttal that might come tomorrow that
say that you know there's no link
between the idf's behavior and what
might be said by government officials
but we see the case when South Africa
sets out how that actually they are
intrinsically linked um and moving away
from the conduct where we had the un uh
being quoted we moved on to the intent
where we have the the state of Israel
being quoted and then we look at the
foot soldiers looking at the videos and
things and linking those twos together
in a in a very succinct and um um a very
impressive way one thing that was um
quite evident was the way in the
presentation the lawyers tried to
separate the comments made by
politicians and by the military in
Israel to what is expected of a
sovereign state when it comes to
protecting the public and also
recognizing the road leading to genocide
and the checks and balances that need to
be made before you get to the GW uh and
yet many who are criticizing Israel
right now are saying well in fact both
of those angles have merged together it
is the state making those comments so
how can it stop
itself
yeah um and and that is you know an
interesting question how are we going to
get a state that denies the genocide is
happening to stop the behavior which is
genocidal in itself um but the the South
African case lays out quite clearly how
the pronouncements by members of the
government creates this kind of policy
uh that can be inferred by anybody else
on the ground and by their own military
that they've created an atmosphere and
created a kind of a uh an environment in
which those troops Now understand that
it is government policy to destroy Gaza
and and linking those two things
together is shows the the genocidal
intent uh and is going to be very
difficult for Israel to say that that's
not at least a plausible conclusion
where of course are not at the Merit
stage yet so we don't need to look at
any evidence but to to to to argue that
it's not plausible that these these this
incitement of genocide which is not
being punished by the Israeli state
which is another uh element of genocide
U to argue that this is not plausibly
genocide is going to be extremely
difficult one of the things that we did
hear from Professor vau low was the
argument around the debate that has
happened over the last three months of
Israel continually saying we are acting
in
self-defense that was completely you
might say the the the rug was pulled
from underneath the feet of that
argument when you were an occupying
State you have you don't have that
right that's right you don't have that
right now there there there might be
some uh scope for arguing that Israel is
no longer occupying that they they have
withdrawn and are and are sieging
instead but but that is something that
you know on the face of it doesn't seem
to be the truth of the case and and the
the lawyer quoted the security Council
which said that is certainly not the
case but that is one of Israel's only
kind of few legal arguments that they
can make that they can say listen the
the obligations under the genocide
convention can't interfere with their
obligation to self-defense but as you
say that's a very weak argument at the
moment self-defense is designed to
defend yourself against other states not
to defend yourself against your own
territory so it's going to be very hard
to argue that um the other argument they
could make is maybe that there they have
no genuine dispute with South Africa on
this issue again the scope the scope for
the the court is quite wide what are
they understand as the dispute and
simply saying that you think genocide
has been carried out and Israel
responding that it isn't uh is enough to
establish a dispute so what they're left
with then I think what we're going to
see is Israel speaking to the world and
trying to use graphic images trying to
use videos to to blame the victim
basically uh what Stanley con the great
sociologist criminologist would call uh
denial of the victim saying listen we're
actually the victim uh we're the ones
under attack and whatever we do is
Justified um and that has no legal
weight but but they want they want to
speak to the world while they have this
platform Thomas mcmanis the director of
international State Crime initiative at
Queen Mary's University in London thanks
very much for joining us